once you hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits have rolled in 2016 denis
villeneuve latest film arrival was
released to great commercial success and
critical acclaim the film was based on
the 1998 novella the story of your life
written by Ted Chang before we even dive
into the story of arrival and explore
its ending we need to take a look at its
beginning the beginning that is key to
the end we open with narration from our
main character Louise Banks played by
Amy Adams I used to think this was the
beginning of your story
[Music]
memory is a strange thing it doesn't
work like I thought it did we are so
bound by time by its order
from here we see an emotional and
heart-wrenching montage of Louise
raising her daughter Hannah who becomes
ill as a teenager and passes away this
prologue of sorts ends with a very
telling line from Louise but now I'm not
so sure I believe in beginnings and
endings that line is an important
element of what makes a rival tick as
the beginning of the story is just as
vital as its ending in a way it's almost
a clue but the true brilliance of a
rival is how the reveal is stripped away
as the film progresses to its finale
Louise is a linguist a language
specialist who is called by the
government to help them research a giant
alien spacecraft that has arrived on
earth one of 12 around the entire globe
she is also joined by physicist Ian
Donnelly played by jeremy renner and
they both endeavor to understand the
alien creatures on board the ship they
dubbed the aliens hepta pods and
discovered that their language is an
incredibly dense and complex one
comprised of circular symbols the
emphasis of language is another
extremely important facets of arrival
whether it's commenting on the dangers
of communication lost in translation or
whether it's addressing the mind-bending
elements that begins to change Louise
throughout the film she begins to see
flashbacks of her daughter as she
studies the alien language but the more
she learns of the circular symbols the
deeper she feels connected to those
flashbacks the government begins to get
antsy about the alien visitors
particularly over talk of a weapon that
scares a lot of people around the world
and rogue soldiers plant a bomb inside
the ship which drastically damages the
relations between the two parties and
mortally wounds one of the hepta parts
the world's leaders agree to demand that
the hepta pods leave earth in 24 hours
or else they will attack and Louise
decides to go into the ship alone to
talk with the surviving alien it
explains to Louise that they have come
to earth to help humanity and that the
weapon is in fact a gift
in 3,000 years the hepta pods will
return when they know that they will
need the help of humanity they know this
because the hepta pods are not bound to
the linearity of time the gift is their
language and their language opens time
as the hepta pod puts it this is when we
learn the truth about Louise's daughter
Hannah
throughout the film we see her
flashbacks to her daughter's life but
Louise asks the Hebda pod
who is the child earlier in the film one
of Louise's flashbacks was of her
daughter showing her a drawing she had
done in school as she said mommy and
daddy talked to animals she's describing
what Louise did with the hepta pots at
this point it is made clear that
Louise's daughter was never shown in
flashback but perhaps in flash-forward
as Hannah is to be born after the events
of the arrival of the hepta pots but
framing it or breaking it down as a
flash-forward is almost going against
the real idea of the story which is that
the hepta pods language doesn't allow
the aliens to see into the future or the
past but to see and exist in every
moment of time fluid and nonlinear the
more that Louise learned their language
or the weapon or again you could call it
the gift she saw more of Hannah and
starts to begin the experience of
perceiving time in a completely
different way now there is an actual
theory known as the sapir-whorf
hypothesis or linguistic relativity that
proposes that our perception of time
itself is tied completely or at least
partially to our language Louise begins
to understand that the child she saw was
her own daughter a daughter that has yet
to be born and that she would know her
death was inevitable
we also learned while Louise named her
daughter Hannah your name is very
special because it is a palindrome it
reads the same forward and backward she
names her daughter with a palindrome
something that is the same forwards and
backwards which is exactly how her
experience of perceiving time would be
at that moment at the beginning of the
film when she says I don't believe in
beginnings or endings anymore it all
ties in to this palindromic idea in the
original short story the emphasis is
purely on Louise's discovery and
experience of this new language and
caption of time and also that she
decides to have hannah despite knowing
her fate the idea of free will and
whether we really have control of our
own destiny as a central theme to the
story in the story of your life it
remains personal intimate and
heartbreaking but in arrival we have the
added element of China preparing to
attack the ship which ratchets up a big
attention where Louise accesses a point
in time in the future in which she meets
general Shang
the man responsible for deciding to
attack the hepta pods he thanks her for
convincing him to stand down when she
called his private number and recited to
him his wife's dying words 18 months ago
you did something remarkable something
not even my superior has done what's
that you changed my mind
you're the reason for this unification
all because you reached out to me on my
private number your private number in
general I don't know your private number
now you know
the suggestion here when shank shows her
his private number is that Louise does
go on to teach the world what she dubs
the universal language and that Shang
had also at that point begun to perceive
time differently and knew that she had
to see his private number and that she
had to be told his wife's last words the
past informs the future the future saves
the past and all points of time flow
through the present according to the
screenwriter of arrival the translated
final words of Chang's wife were in war
there are no winners-only widows the
hepta pod ships leave earth having
imparted what Louise calls the tool and
then we learned that ian would go on to
be the father of hannah and the reason
he left Louise was because she didn't
initially tell him their daughters
inevitable fate the power of the story
of Louise's story is that she doesn't
change her future she doesn't free
herself of the pain of Hannah's death
because to have never had hannah at all
would also rob her of the beauty of her
daughter's life
it's an incredibly hard decision to ever
have to comprehend making if you were in
the same position
originally in earlier draft of the
script the gift from the haptic pods was
actually to be blueprints to build an
interstellar ship like an arc
once Christopher Nolan's interstellar
was released they decided to scrap the
idea for obvious reasons instead
focusing on the power of language and an
idea that I think is far more personal
and powerful ultimately arrival is about
one woman's choice more than it is about
the power of language and that her
decision isn't the right choice
all the wrong choice it's simply her
choice she embraces it the happiness and
the pain though you could argue that if
she saw Hanna as she began to perceive
time in a nonlinear fashion that she was
always going to be born and that there
was no other way her choice had already
been made instinctually that is the true
paradox of the film because it builds to
an emotional climax of a woman deciding
to have a child knowing she will die
young but at the same time it had to
happen if Louise had already experienced
memories from the future but I like to
interpret this quandary quite simply
Louise was always going to be the type
of person who could make that difficult
choice and that there was only ever one
way she was going to choose love
[Music]
what did you think of the ending and
indeed the beginning of the palindromic
arrival do you think the film promotes
the idea of free will or condemns it was
Louise's choice ever truly in her own
hands or predetermined by fate let us
know down below and as always thanks for
watching
[Music]